User stories 1.0 (#4361)
EnMasseProject/enmasse: documentation/design/user-stories/shared-infra.adoc

== Enable messaging for a namespace by creating a tenant and an address

Messaging tenant defines the following resources:

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingTenant
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: myapp
spec: {}
---
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2

> kind: MessagingAddress

Reviewer: @lulf so what should happen when I create MessagingAddress CR in namespace where MessagingTenant is not deployed? Does it create messaging tenant default in namespace, or it should fail?

Author: @kornys I was thinking it would report in the address status that it cannot find a messaging tenant, and address will be in phase Pending (or Failed?).

Reviewer: @lulf maybe keep it in Pending phase with error message, and I expect that when I create MessagingTenant in namespace, address will be configured and CR switch to Active phase? WDYT?

Reviewer: or maybe would be nice if operator creates messaging tenant if does not exist

Author: > @lulf maybe keep it in Pending phase with error message, and I expect that when I create MessagingTenant in namespace, address will be configured and CR switch to Active phase? WDYT?

Yes, that is what I had envisioned.

> or maybe would be nice if operator creates messaging tenant if does not exist

We discussed this when going through these user stories initially, and found that automatically creating the messaging tenant would make it a bit strange wrt. what happens when you remove all addresses. I.e. it would either have to remain or we would have to delete it when there are no address. The behavior gets a bit messy, so I think the cleanest way is to require it to be created, which shouldn't be much of a problem for the 'getting started' experience.

Reviewer: Hope it won't be confusing for users :)

Author: Yeah, I'm open to change behavior here based on what we see, but I think explicit creation is a better initial default than auto-create to avoid accidental confusion.

metadata:
  name: myqueue
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  queue:
    # Note: a queue 'mydlq' must exist!
    DeadLetterQueue: mydlq
    # Note: a queue 'myexpiry' must exist!
    ExpiryQueue: myexpiry

    # Forwarders require a MessagingConnector to exist, in this case one that is named 'remote1'.
    forwarders:
    - name: fwd1
      remoteAddress: remote1/queue1
      direction: in
```

NOTE: the properties that are only applicable to a few types, are specified under the type object as shown above.

=== CRUDLW a messaging endpoint in a namespace where messaging is enabled

Create a `MessagingEndpoint` resource containing either `cluster`, `route`, `ingress`, `loadbalancer` or `nodeport` objects
that specify the properties. The protocols supported are AMQP, AMQP+TLS,
AMQP-WS and AMQP-WS+TLS.

The default protocols depends on the endpoint type. For "Ingress" and "Route", the default
protocols is AMQPS. For NodePort, LoadBalancer and Cluster, the default protocols are AMQP, AMQPS.

==== Configure an in-cluster endpoint with TLS

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  # TLS configuration for endpoint
  tls: {}

>   protocols:

Reviewer 2: I think in the status section, some part of the object needs to map from protocols to port numbers.

Author: Updated proposal with a sub-header on endpoint status section.

    - AMQPS
    - AMQP

  cluster: {}
```

==== Configure an endpoint exposed as a route

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:

>   route:

Author: I think we should have sane defaults for the protocols based on the endpoint type, but in this case I agree it should not allow specifying protocols other than AMQPS.

>   route:

Reviewer 2: AMQP+TLS or AMQP-WS+TLS.

    hostname: messaging.example.com # Optional
```

==== Configure an endpoint exposed as a loadbalancer

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  tls: {}
  loadbalancer
    annotations: {}
    requireTls: true # Setting this to 'true' will disable non-TLS port
```

=== CRUDLW a messaging connector in a namespace where messaging is enabled

=== Managing certificates for a messaging endpoint

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  ...

  # Required for endpoints of type 'route' and 'ingress', as these only support TLS
  # For other types, specifying `tls` will ensure they expose traffic on TLS
  tls:
    # Provide certificate values externally
    external:
      # Can be input directly or using a secret
      certificate:
        value: PEM-encoded cert
      key:
        valueFromSecret:
          name: "mysecret" # Name of secret containing certificate
          key: "tls.key"
    # Self-signed

>     selfsigned: {}

Reviewer 2: in the case where many endpoints take the self signed option, would there be.a single CA shared by all the endpoints (like we have now)?  How would a user get the CA certificate?

Author: Thats a good point. If we want to keep self-signed (which I'm open to discuss), we could create the initial CA when tenant is created and then use that CA to sign any endpoints that would need creation. It would mean we generate a potentially unused CA, but I feel like it would be cleaner than to auto-create CA when endpoint is created etc (running into the same lifecycle issues as for auto-creating MessagingTenant).

Reviewer 2: I'd lean towards keeping self signed.   I think it makes the getting started experience easier.  I like the of creating the initialCA when the tenant is created. The overhead of it is sufficiently small to not be of a concern.  I suppose the tls section of each endpoint that refers to the self-signed would expose a ca field.

Author: Added to the status section example.

  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  route:
    hostname: messaging.example.com # Optional
```

==== Configure an endpoint exposed as a loadbalancer

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  tls: {}
  loadbalancer
    annotations: {}
    requireTls: true # Setting this to 'true' will disable non-TLS port
```

==== Status section

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  ...
status:
  phase: Active
  host: endpoint1-myapp.enmasse-infra.svc
  ports:
  - name: "AMQP"
    value: 5672
  - name: "AMQP+TLS"
    value: 5671
  tls:
    selfsigned:
      ca: # CA PEM
  conditions: # Conditions array for kubernetes-style conditions
```

=== CRUDLW a messaging connector in a namespace where messaging is enabled

=== Managing certificates for a messaging endpoint

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingEndpoint
metadata:
  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  ...

  # Required for endpoints of type 'route' and 'ingress', as these only support TLS
  # For other types, specifying `tls` will ensure they expose traffic on TLS

>   tls:

Reviewer 2: A tis endpoint should be configurable to want or need a client certificate.  We need configuration for this use case together with configuration for the trusted CA anchor(s)/intermediates.

  # Cluster type creates a on-cluster load balancer
  cluster: {}

  # NodePort type creates a nodePort service, exposing the application on an ephemeral port on all nodes.
  nodePort: {}

  # LoadBalancer type creates an external load balancer for this endpoint.
  loadBalancer:
    # Allow setting annotations on the service object that are specific to LoadBalancer implementations.
    annotations:
      aws-specific-annotation: value

  # Ingress type creates an Ingress resource
  ingress:
    # Optional: Allow configuring annotations specific to ingress controller implementations
    annotations: {}

  # Route type maps to OpenShift Route resource
  route:
    # Allows controlling the TLS termination of this route. Only supported for AMQP-WSS protocol.
    tlsTermination: passthrough | reencrypt

status:
  phase: Pending | Configuring | Active | Failed | Terminating
  message: "Useful error message"

  # Host set to auto-generated value
  host: messaging.example.com

  ports:
  - name: endpoint1-amqp
    port: 5672
    protocol: AMQP
  conditions:
  - type: FoundTenant
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: 2020-......

>   tls:

Reviewer 2: the TLS section should include the certificate's start and end date.  This will make it easy to display expiry info in the Console and gives a convenient location for a mechanism to monitor for certificate expiry.

  name: myqueue
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  anycast: {}
  multicast: {}
  queue: {}
  topic: {}
  subscription:
    # References a MessagingAddress named mytopic with type topic.
    topic: mytopic

  # A system-wide address available on all brokers
  deadLetter: {}
status:
  phase: Pe
```

---

=== Ability to configure DLQ, expiry, forwarders etc. per address

* Queues that should be configured with a DLQ or ExpiryQueue should reference an address with type `deadLetter`.

> * Forwarders maybe configured for the queue (`in` and `out`), subscription (`out`) or deadLetter(`out`)) types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Forwarders may be configured for the queue (`in` and `out`), subscription (`out`) or deadLetter(`out`)) types.
```

> * If the referenced DLQ does not exist, the status section of the address will provide an error message.

Reviewer 2: Just an observation, but if you forward an expired messages, won't it spontaneously expire again at its new destination.

Author: Good point, we should note that in the docs then.

Reviewer 3: well, can queues be configured so that they effectively ignore expiry?  You'd want that generally for DLQs / expiry queues

Reviewer 2: Answering my own original question, no.  When artemis expires a message., internally it actually creates a copy of the message for the expiry queue, and set the copy's expiry to infinity.  The message's original expiry is set in a custom application property.  Not an AMQP compliant approach, but understandable one for an multi protocol broker.

org.apache.activemq.artemis.core.server.impl.QueueImpl#makeCopy(org.apache.activemq.artemis.core.server.MessageReference, boolean, boolean)

  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  protocols:
  - AMQP
  - AMQPS
  - AMQP-WS
  - AMQP-WSS

>   # Optional: Override generated hostname for endpoint. Clients must have the AMQP OPEN hostname set to this value.

Reviewer 2: Will this be ignored for endpoints except route and ingress?

Author: It is useful for both loadbalancer and nodeport as well, because the router will expect that host for clients connecting. So if you want to setup messaging on messaging.example.com, you create an endpoint with that hostname, and then point your DNS record to the created loadbalancer.

For nodeport and local development, the host would be set to something like $(minikube ip) for clients to be able to connect outside the cluster.

For cluster service, it is less useful, but you could end up setting the AMQP host in your client and connect to the ip instead of the host, and it would work.

  host: example.com

  # Optional: specify TLS configuration for endpoint.
  tls:
    # Selfsigned is default unless specified by a `MessagingPlan`.
    selfsigned: {}
    # OpenShift requests a service certificate signed by OpenShift service CA
    openshift: {}
    # External allows providing certificate externally. CN/SANs are validated against host
    external:
      cert: # Reuse structure from address space connector spec
      key: # Reuse structure from address space connector spec

  # Cluster type creates a on-cluster load balancer
  cluster: {}

  # NodePort type creates a nodePort service, exposing the application on an ephemeral port on all nodes.

>   nodePort: {}

Reviewer 2: it ephemeral the right word? I think the port number will be random (from the point of view of the enduser), but stable for the lifetime of the MessagingEndpoint.   I think if the cluster gets restarted, the port number may change.  Is my understanding right?

Author: I'm used to calling it the 'ephemeral port range' (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephemeral_port), but I agree its perhaps not the best term to use. Maybe dynamic or private is a better term.

Reviewer 3: I presume Ulf is using it in the sense of a "port in the ephemeral range" (although actually the default for K8s seems to be a subset of the default ephemeral range)

  # LoadBalancer type creates an external load balancer for this endpoint.
  loadBalancer:
    # Allow setting annotations on the service object that are specific to LoadBalancer implementations.
    annotations:
      aws-specific-annotation: value

  # Ingress type creates an Ingress resource
  ingress:
    # Optional: Allow configuring annotations specific to ingress controller implementations
    annotations: {}

  # Route type maps to OpenShift Route resource
  route:
    # Allows controlling the TLS termination of this route. Only supported for AMQP-WSS protocol.
    tlsTermination: passthrough | reencrypt

status:
  phase: Pending | Configuring | Active | Failed | Terminating
  message: "Useful error message"

> 

Reviewer 2: should we add a type: like you have done for MessagingAddress?

Author: Agreed, good idea.

  name: endpoint1
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  tls: {}
  loadBalancer
    annotations: {}
```

---

=== CRUDLW a messaging connector in a namespace where messaging is enabled

Connectors are created by defining a resource of kind `MessagingConnector`.

* The connector name is taken from the `metadata.name` field and should be used as the prefix for any forwarders created on addresses.
* Resource is similar to what exists in `AddressSpace` `.spec.connectors`.

==== Resource definition:

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingConnector
metadata:
  name: conn1
  namespace: myspace
spec:
  endpointHosts:
  - host: example.com
    port: 5672
  role: route-container
  idleTimeout: 12
  maxFrameSize: 12345
  tls:
    caCert:
      value: <Base64-encoded PEM>
    clientCert:
      valueFromSecret:

>         name: client-cert

Reviewer 2: missing key

Author: Thanks, will add it!

kind: MessagingPlan
metadata:
  name: myplan
  namespace: planspace
spec:
  default:
    endpoints:
     - route: {}
       protocols:
       - AMQPS
       tls:
         openshift: {}
     - cluster: {}
        # Define which protocols are supported by the default endpoint
       protocols:
       - AMQP
```

=== Restrict which endpoint types and cert providers can be used for messaging tenants

Restricting allowed endpoint types and cert providers allow the service admin to control
exposure of messaging endpoints in a cluster. The `restrict.endpoints` field is used to restrict
which endpoint types and which protocols are allowed.

* `MessagingEndpoint` resources for tenants referencing this plan must exactly match one of the entries.
* The schema for each entry corresponds to the `spec` object in `MessagingEndpoint` with the following exceptions:
  * The `host` field is ignored and set to defaults

The following example will enforce `route` endpoints to use a specific certificate and require `cluster` endpoints to use unencrypted protocols.

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingPlan
metadata:
  name: myplan
  namespace: planspace
spec:
  restrict:

>     endpoints:

Reviewer 2: I am wondering if there is a more expressive way to let the user encode restrictions.  It reminds me of schematron's niche  back in the XML world (Pangea :) ).

>      - route: {}

Reviewer 2: the semantics don't seem clear to me.

Author: I kind of think of it like templates of endpoint specs that must be matched in order to be created. If any sub-path of the object does not match, then the endpoint will not be created.

Reviewer 2: I'm not getting the analogy - do you podTemplates?

Author: Updated with OPA rules as examples

       protocols:
       - AMQPS
       tls:
         external:
           cert:
             valueFromSecret:
               name: external-certs
     - cluster: {}
        # Define which protocols are supported by the default endpoint
       protocols:
       - AMQP
```

=== Restrict how much memory and storage is consumed per messaging tenant

Create the following `MessagingPlan` to enforce limits:

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingPlan
metadata:
  name: plan1
  namespace: planspace
spec:

>   broker:

Reviewer 2: should there be a restrict object here?

Author: I'm not sure, there are kind of conflicts of interest here between the desire to provide kubernetes-type resource specifications, which have both requests and limits, and restrictions which are kind of just restrictions.

Need to think some more about that.

  allowOverride: true | false
```

=== Configure scaling of the routers based on the connection load and throughput

Create/modify the `MessagingInfra` resource to include the `dynamic` strategy for the router. This strategy scales
the number of router replicas based on the parameters `connections` and `messageThroughputSeconds` per router.

* If the observed value of these parameters go above the max, the number of router replicas is increased.
* If the observed value of these parameters go below min, the number of router replicas is decreased.

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingInfra
metadata:
  name: myinfra
spec:
  router:
    scalingStrategy:
      dynamic:
        # Specify the range of replicas this strategy can operate within
        replicas:
          min: 2
          max: 5
        # Strategy parameters that is used for determining if it should scale up/down
        parameters:

>           # Number of connections _per router replica_

Reviewer 2: How will this work?  Won't we need some mechanism to rebalance connections?  For instance I have connections min/max set to 10/1000 and a single router with 1001 connections.  The system spins up a second router which will have 0 connections.  A native algorithm could flip flop state, shutting down router 2 as it has too few and then spinning it up again.

Author: I think we would need to rebalance, otherwise scaling will not help as you state. I think if you have > 2 routers, we can do an approximation of that by doing a controlled rolling restart if we are above the minimum available required replicas. 

However, ideally I think the operator would terminate the existing connections on routers during a scaleup/down event.

Reviewer 2: IdeallyI think  we'd want some kind of heuristic that could take into account the cost of the connection (sessions, link, message size/throughput) and feed that into a rebalancing algorithm.  That sounds tricky.  

I think ultimately we will want to do something with intelligence, but we don't necessarily need to include in 1.0.

* If the observed value of these parameters go below min, the number of broker instances is decreased.

```
apiVersion: enmasse.io/v1beta2
kind: MessagingInfra
metadata:
  name: myinfra
spec:
  broker:
    scalingStrategy:
      dynamic:
        # Specify the pool range this strategy can operate within
        poolSize:
          min: 2
          max: 5
        # Strategy parameters that is used for determining if it should scale up/down
        parameters:
          # Number of addresses per broker
          addresses:
            min: 100
            max: 1000
```

=== Configure per-user limits for connections, links, message size

TODO: Needs support in router plugin and auth service

=== Migrate tenant configuration and data from 0.x to 1.0 (with downtime)

Configuration migration:

* StandardInfraConfig/BrokeredInfraConfig -> MessagingInfra: Manual
* A separate cluster must be used for the 1.0 cluster
* AddressPlan -> MessagingAddressPlan: Manual
* AddressSpacePlan -> MessagingPlan: Manual
* AddressSpace -> MessagingTenant, MessagingConnector and MessagingEndpoint: Script-assisted
* Address -> MessagingAddress: Script-assisted

> 

Reviewer 2: MessagingUser -> MessageUser, MessageRole, MessageRoleBinding: Script assisted.

Data migration:

Once the second cluster is configured with tenants and addresses, the next steps are:

* Create user on 0.x cluster with access to all address spaces and addresses
* Create user on 1.0 cluster with access to all tenants and their addresses
* Stop traffic to 0.x cluster
* Run migration application with configured users. The application will:
** Lookup output data from the address space and address configuration conversion scripts

> ** Consume messages from each address in each address space on the 0.x cluster

Reviewer 2: Only works for queue types.  Contents of subscriptions would  be lost, unless we made special upgrade rules that allow subscriptions to be routed to as if they were queues.

Author: Good point. Maybe a subscription type addresses could have a property specifying if an incoming linkroute/autoLink in the route should be created for it for this purpose? Would it be safer/better to make this a global setting for all subscriptions, settable on the 'MessagingInfra'?

Reviewer 2: If we were to do this, I don't think it should be a standard user-level feature.  It should be just some switch we can throw for the upgrade and then turn it off after the upgrade is complete.  Maybe an annotation?   OTOH maybe we make subscriptions out of scope?

Author: If we can avoid caring about subscriptions, that would be my preference.

I agree it would be an annotation and not something we put into the schema. Maybe just an env variable to the operator.
